---
layout: post
title:  A Brief Tour of Tools
date:   2018-04-01
---

## Core philosophy

### Make your tools as ergonomic as possible

Ergonomics often comes up when talking with HR during onboarding: it's the
reason why you should use comfortable, supportive chairs, keyboards, mice, and
such. "Battle scars" from work shouldn't be encouraged. If your eyes, wrists, or
butt cheeks are hurting, try to address that problem. You're doing labor. Labor
that most likely isn't as tolling, as say, construction, but labor nonetheless.
Take care of your body. If you try to fight it, it's likely to win. Even if
you're not feeling active pain now, you might start experiencing symptoms after
years of damage. "It works for me" shouldn't be the end of it. Get an ergonomic
chair, keyboard, and mouse to reduce strain. Here[^1][^2] are some good
guidelines on reducing eyestrain (I can personally vouch for tools like
[f.lux](https://justgetflux.com/)!).

What does this mean for software? If you don't like the way you're interacting
with your tools (physical _or_ virtual), you're not going to have as much fun
using them.

Sometimes that can be a _good_ thing: if a tool
_shouldn't_ be used, then you can design your system with that idea in mind. As
we are all designers in some way, this should be a familiar idea---e.g. if you
add a feature that forces a user to do 10 clicks instead of one, they're less
likely to use that feature (c.f. trying to close your Amazon account).

Notice that I'm not talking about speed. The amount of time that you save with
one configuration or another probably isn't going to save you the amount of time
that you put into setting it up (unless something was _really_ wrong
before-hand). But reducing UX friction can often make you more productive,
reduce extraneous repetitive motion, and eliminate unnecessary mental work to
get from point A to point B. Some things that help towards this end include:

- Reducing mouse usage[^4]
- Reducing chorded shortcuts (e.g. minimizing stuff like <kbd>shift</kbd>+<kbd>&#8984;</kbd>+<kbd>option</kbd>+<kbd>t</kbd>)
- Reducing the steps to switch between tools and contexts

### Make your tools accessible to an outsider without a large amount of reconfiguration

Everything that you do to configure your machine is most likely increasing the
barrier to entry somehow. That's okay. It's your machine---it should be most
comfortable for _you_. However, that doesn't mean there won't be a time where
someone else might have to use your keyboard or read your monitor. It should be
easy enough for that visitor to understand what's going on or do some simple
tasks without you restarting your damn machine. Note that that doesn't mean
disabling all of your config when someone walks over[^wizardry].

### Don't overdo it

Your tools or configuration won't make you a significantly better developer. It
might even make you a more annoying developer if you won't stop talking about
such topics. And it always takes time to customize these things---the increased
efficiency won't make up for that. Again, it's about getting you to enjoy using
the tools while reducing strain, whether that strain is physical or mental.

## tmux

I use tmux inside of iTerm2[^3]. Tmux is a "terminal multiplexer" which is an
incredibly geeky way of saying it allows you to have windows/splits inside of a
OS level window. Here are my main motivations for using it.

### Attach and detach

When you start up tmux you're starting up a server, on which you create and
attach "sessions" (basically just workspaces) where you can create windows
(really closer to tabs) which can have splits. These sessions can be attached
to and detached from at will. And that action is a completely distinct one from
opening or closing iTerm2, meaning if iTerm2 has to close for one reason or
another, my windows and splits set up exactly as when I left them.

This is great on a local machine but invaluable on remote sessions: when I was
doing research on machines that could only be SSH'd into, a random drop in the
Internet connection just meant I had to reattach to the session that was running
on the remote server. Note that the server will still die if your computer has
to restart.

I also find that this navigation is much easier than fiddling with actual
windows in a GUI. Which tend to be pretty poorly organized for search and
retrieval. Even in macOS, if I have a window that is minimized, I have to either
use my mouse to inspect my collection of hidden windows or cycle through them
using <kbd>control</kbd>+<kbd>f4</kbd>[^cycle].

### Prefixes over chords

This is going to be a bit of a recurring theme, but tmux allows you to go from
split to split, window to window, or session to session without pressing many
keys _simultaneously_. Instead, you can define a common prefix (I have
<kbd>control</kbd>+<kbd>space</kbd>) and then press the tmux-specific shortcut
of your choosing.

### How to get started

If you're on a Mac, you can use Homebrew:

```
brew install tmux
```

[Here's][tmux-tutorial] a tutorial to get you started.

## Vim/Neovim

I could talk probably all day about Vim and why I love it. I'll try to summarize
here to save your time and/or sanity. I _will_ note that Vim has a fairly steep
learning curve but I find is worth it in the end. See [here][vim-usability] for
a great blogpost about Vim and usability.

### Ubiquity

Vi or Vim is on basically every \*nix machine that you might come across. If you
know how to use it in one place, you can use it anywhere.

### Keyboard-first design

Every interaction with Vim is intended to be done with the keyboard. There are
some things that _can_ be done with the mouse (like scrolling or cursor
movement), but it's primarily designed to be manipulated via the keyboard. That
makes it generally quite fast, eliminating the time to move your hand to the
mouse and back.

### Composability

This is probably the biggest and most Vim-specific point here. When you
manipulate text in Vim, you do so in a sort of "language", complete with verbs,
nouns, adjectives, adverbs, etc.

Let's say I'm editing a Ruby script and I've got this double negative here. We
want to make this a bit more readable, replacing the `unless` with an `if` and
the `empty?` with a `present?`.

<script src="https://asciinema.org/a/HRBzkylrV8Bih8llxcEY8nJWV.js" id="asciicast-HRBzkylrV8Bih8llxcEY8nJWV" async></script>

Here are all the key presses I needed to do to perform the above:
```
ciwifjjwwwct?presentjj:wq
```

Let's break that down:

- `ciw`: This is basically a "sentence". I'm pressing these keys them in what is
  called "normal mode". `c` means "change", `i` means "inner", and `w` means
  "word". "Change" means delete and then go into "insert mode", the mode where
  when I type, those characters appear on screen. I applied that "verb" to what
  is called a "text object". Here that "text object" is made up of the adjective
  "inner" with the noun "word".
- `if`: This is just me typing the word "if".
- `jj`: This is a command I have set up for "insert mode" that gets me back to
  "normal mode". This is <kbd>escape</kbd> by default but I find this much
  easier.
- `www`: Here I'm pressing that "noun" `w` three times. Since there's no "verb"
  here, that just moves my cursor 1 "word" each time. I could have also typed
  `3w` and achieved the same thing.
- `ct?`: Here I'm using the same `c` verb but this time with the "noun" `t?`
  which means "to `?`", i.e. all the characters from my current position up to
  (but not including) the next incidence of the character `?` on the current
  line.
- `present`: This is just me typing the word "present".
- `jj`: Same as before.
- `:wq`: Here I'm performing what is known as a "command". `:` gets me into
  "command mode" (moving my cursor temporarily to the bottom of the Vim window)
  where I then type `w` for "write" (meaning "save") and `q` for "quit".

This is a simple example, but as you can see, you can mix and match all these
building blocks to manipulate your files in quite complex ways. Many Vim users
also create plugins that add core "parts of speech" to the editor. E.g.
[vim-surround][vim-surround] enables the sequence `cs"'` which allows you to
"change the surrounding characters" (`cs`) from `"` to `'` as well as the
sequence `ysiw]` "add surrounding characters" (`ys`) to the "inner word" (`iw`),
specifically brackets (`]`).

### Integration with the terminal

(Partly thanks to tmux) I can run Vim in the same program that has my
`foreman` procs, my git interface, my logs, and pretty much everything else.
Switching between all of those things is super easy thanks to a plugin I use
called [vim-tmux-navigator][vim-tmux-navigator]. Basically I can use

- <kbd>control</kbd>+<kbd>h</kbd> (left)
- <kbd>control</kbd>+<kbd>j</kbd> (down)
- <kbd>control</kbd>+<kbd>k</kbd> (up)
- <kbd>control</kbd>+<kbd>l</kbd> (right)

to navigate between tmux and Vim panes indiscriminately.

When I need to run a test, I have a plugin called [vim-test][vim-test] that
allows me to run a test in a neighboring tmux pane and then interact with that
terminal session afterwards.

There are many other niceties here as well (e.g. sending the contents of a SQL
query edited in a Vim session to an interactive `psql` session) that I may go
into in a later post.


### So much more


Again, I can talk about Vim all day (and probably will). There are many things
not covered here that I will return to later (possibly including a breakdown of
my `.vimrc`).


### How to get started

Like I said before, Vim is famous for having a bit of a steep learning curve.
I'd recommend trying it out in your leisure time because it _will_ slow you down
at first.

Once again, the download for the newest version (probably more up to date than
what you have on your machine already) is on Homebrew as well. However, I'd
recommend installing the relatively recent fork `neovim` instead (it has a few
nicities including better built-in tutorial:

```
brew install neovim
```

Launch it from the shell (using the name `nvim`, *not* `neovim`). Then I'd
follow the built-in tutorial by typing `:Tutor`. The first online resource given
at the bottom of the tutorial, ["Learn Vim
Progressively"][learn-vim-progressively] is also great---it's how I first
started.


## FZF

FZF is a fuzzy-finder for the shell that you can use in a bunch of different
ways, like...

### Finding files (while also obeying your `.gitignore`)[^vim-color-note]
<script src="https://asciinema.org/a/28rDzTqI5nEE9mM89DKZmf5Zo.js" id="asciicast-28rDzTqI5nEE9mM89DKZmf5Zo" async></script>
### Finding git commits
<script src="https://asciinema.org/a/xYrk74sFKjQXzGKEPJSrdypXs.js" id="asciicast-xYrk74sFKjQXzGKEPJSrdypXs" async></script>
### Finding old commands
I couldn't manage to record this one without any potentially sensitive
information, but it works as you might expect.

At its core, FZF is just a way of filtering data in a human-friendly way. You
can pipe anything in and get the same fuzzy-find interface
(e.g. `cat file.txt | fzf`).

### How to get started

Once again, if you can, just use Homebrew.

```
brew install fzf
```

See [the project's installation instructions][fzf-installation-instructions] for
details, including howt to integrate FZF with tmux and vim. These integrations
work incredibly well so I'd highly recommend setting that up.


<div style="text-align: center;">•••</div>

That's it for now! More posts on this stuff to come, I'm sure.

<!--footnotes & references-->

[^1]: <https://ergonomics.ucla.edu/injuries-and-prevention/eye-strain.html>
[^2]: <https://lifehacker.com/5818056/how-do-i-prevent-eyestrain>
[^3]: The main reason for using it over the default macOS Terminal is for 256 color support.
[^4]:
    This isn't a cure-all for repetitive strain injuries. Stretching and
    regular breaks are more important.

[^wizardry]:
    It can be a great way to learn tricks
    when you see someone do some keyboard wizardry and you ask "How did you do that!?"

[^cycle]:
    Just as a heads up: you can cycle through open applications with
    <kbd>&#8984;</kbd>+<kbd>tab</kbd> and open windows for your current
    application with <kbd>&#8984;</kbd>+<kbd>`</kbd>.

[^vim-color-note]:
    I'm not sure why the colors on this recording are inaccurate,
    but I assure you Vim on my machine is quite colorful. I use the colorscheme
    [seoul256][seoul256].

[vim-tmux-navigator]: https://github.com/christoomey/vim-tmux-navigator
[vim-usability]: http://www.terminally-incoherent.com/blog/2012/09/05/vim-is-a-usability-nightmare/
[vim-test]: https://github.com/janko-m/vim-test
[vim-surround]: https://github.com/tpope/vim-surround
[fzf-installation-instructions]: https://github.com/junegunn/fzf#using-homebrew-or-linuxbrew
[seoul256]: https://github.com/junegunn/seoul256.vim
[tmux-tutorial]: https://hackernoon.com/a-gentle-introduction-to-tmux-8d784c404340
[learn-vim-progressively]: http://yannesposito.com/Scratch/en/blog/Learn-Vim-Progressively/
